.\" (c) 1998 by Abacus Research & Development, Inc. (ARDI)
.\"
.\" This man page is part of the commercial Executor package available
.\" from ARDI <http://www.ardi.com/>.

.TH EXECUTOR 1  "April 10, 1998" "Executor 2.0v"
.SH NAME
executor, executor-svga, executor-demo, executor-svga-demo \- Run Macintosh applications
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B executor
[options]
[mac-application [document1] [document2 ...]]
.SH COPYRIGHT
.if n Executor is Copyright (C) 1986 - 1998 by Abacus Research & Development, Inc.
.if t Executor is Copyright \(co 1986 - 1998 by Abacus Research & Development, Inc.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Executor
runs many \fBMacintosh\fR applications.  It neither contains, nor
requires any code from Apple Computer.  That makes
.B executor
a very complex piece of software and it also introduces many
limitations.
.B Executor
does not run Apple's Finder, nor any INITs or CDEVs.  Facilities newer
than System 7.0 (like QuickTime) are not currently available and even
some System 7.0 features are not present.
.B Executor
has some sound support, very little serial port support and no
networking support.  Executor's font management and printing
capabilities are not as sophisticated as those on a modern Macintosh.
Hardware limitations of the PC floppy controller prevent the use of
floppies formatted at 800K.  Some programs which use undocumented or
misdocumented features will fail under
.B executor.
.PP
.B Executor
is the \fBonly\fR Macintosh emulator available for any platfrom that does not require copying ROMs from
a Macintosh (a practice that is usually illegal).
.PP
Some of the better known applications that people use
.B executor
for include \fIMicrosoft Word 5.1\fP, \fIMicrosoft Excel 4.0\fP,
\fIQuicken 6.0\fP for the Macintosh, \fINIH Image\fP and tons of
games.  A compatibility database and much more information is
available on our web-site (<http://www.ardi.com>).
.SH "SVGA VERSION"
.B Executor
is supported as an X application.  In addition to the X version, the binary
.B executor-svga
is an svgalib application.  This version is not officially supported and
will eventually be supplanted by either an X version that uses DGA, or a GGI
version or both.
.SH "DEMO VERSION"
The binaries
.B executor-demo
and
.B executor-svga-demo
are demo versions which can be used for 30 days to determine the suitability
of
.B executor
to your specific needs.  In addition to only being able to be used for 30
days before expiring, the demo versions also have a few other limitations:
all pages printed will have "Demo" written on them; Macintosh formatted
media can be read but not written; and Command-Key equivalents are not
supported.
.SH OPTIONS
The
.B \-help
option causes Executor to print a list of available options and a
brief description of each option.
.SH ARGUMENTS
If there isn't an argument after the options, Executor will run
"Browser", ARDI's substitute for Apple's Finder.  Browser isn't
particularly clever, but will at least do a good job of keeping
AppleDouble files consistent when they're moved or renamed.  We have
limited resources, so we've put almost all our engineering effort into
rewriting the Mac OS OS and toolbox calls instead of improving our browser.
At some point we hope to integrate sufficiently well into the various
Linux desktop managers that we will be able to do away with our browser
entirely.
.PP
If there is another argument after the options, it's used as the name
of the Macintosh application to run.  This can either be a UNIX
pathname (e.g.
"/tmp/Adobe Illustrator%A8 7.0 Tryout/Adobe Illustrator%A8 7.0 Tryout")
or a Macintosh path name (e.g. "Demo:Swivel Applications:SwivelPro 2.0.4").
Further arguments after the application name are interpreted as documents
that the Macintosh application should open when it is started.
.SH "BUILT-IN F-KEYS"
.TP
.B Cmd-Shift-1
brings up an "About Box" that lists the Executor version number, the
number
of days left in the demo, the total amount of emulated RAM available,
the amount of System RAM consumed, the amount of Application RAM
consumed, and five buttons.  The buttons allow you to see the License
under which you may run
.B executor,
the details of
.B ARDI,
credits, and the tips file
(randomly sorted).  The forth button dismisses the "About Box".
.TP
.B Cmd-Shift-2
tells Executor to re-examine /dev/fd0 and /dev/cdrom for Macintosh
media.  It's imperative that you never remove Mac-formatted media
while Executor is running unless you have already clicked on an
"Eject" button or chosen an "Eject" menu option and had Executor
acknowledge that it's acceptable to remove your Macintosh formatted media.
.TP
.B Cmd-Shift-3
dumps the screen to a file.
.TP
.B Cmd-Shift-5
brings up the "Preferences Panel" which allows you to alter some
.B Executor
parameters and save the changes for later on a per-application basis.
This is especially important if you want to run applications that
require a System version greater than 6.0.7.
.TP
.B Cmd-Shift-6
tells
.B Executor
that when you quit the currently running application that you don't
want to return to the Browser.
.TP
.B Cmd-Shift-7
requests
.B executor
to repaint the screen.  This should never be necessary.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ConfigurationFolder
the directory where per-application configuration files are saved.  These are
the files that are created when you click on the "Save" button of the
"Preferences" panel that comes up when you type Cmd-shift-5.  The default
value is "/var/opt/executor/share/conf".
.TP
.B SystemFolder
the Macintosh name of the folder which contains the System file.  The System
file can be stored in an HFV or in an Apple-Double file.  The default is
for
.B SystemFolder
to be "System:System Folder" with System being part of the HFV
"/var/opt/executor/exsystem.hfv".
.TP
.B PublicDirectoryMap
is the root name of the database, shared with other Executor users, that maps i-numbers
to names.  This is needed, because unlike under UNIX, Macintosh applications
can look up directories by number.  The default is
"/var/opt/executor/directory_map".  The suffix "-le.db" is added to
the
root name.
.TP
.B PrivateDirectoryMap
is the root name of the private database that maps i-numbers to names.  The default is
"~/.executor/directory_map".
.TP
.B DefaultFolder
is the folder that will be displayed whenever the running Macintosh application
brings up a standard get or put dialog box.  The default is "/home/executor".
.TP
.B MacVolumes
This variable tells
.B executor
where it should look for Macintosh volumes.  Directories listed in
MacVolumes will automatically be scanned for HFVs.  MacVolumes is
delimited
by semi-colons (";").  The volume which
contains the System file must be first in any MacVolumes list.  The
default value is "/var/opt/executor/exsystem.hfv;/var/opt/executor".
As such, any HFV created in /var/opt/executor will automatically be
opened when Executor runs.
.TP
.B ScreenDumpFile
When you type Cmd-Shift-3,
.B executor
creates a TIFF file containing a dump of the
.B executor
screen.  The default value is "/tmp/excscrn*.tiff".  The "*" tells
.B executor
where to place an integer (starting with 0) to make the file unique.
In other words, if the files "/tmp/exscrn0.tiff" and
"/tmp/exscrn1.tiff" already exist when a Cmd-Shift-3 is typed,
.B executor
will write its dump into "/tmp/exscrn2.tiff".
.TP
.B PrintersIni
is the name of the file that contains the options of the printing
subsystem.  The default is "/opt/executor/printers.ini".
.TP
.B PrintersDef
is the name of the file that contains the most recently used printer
options.  The default is "/var/opt/executor/printdef.ini"
.SH BUGS
Executor is complex and the man pages are new.  They omit many details.
.PP
.B Executor
works by using the facilities of
.B ROMlib,
a rewrite of the MacOS OS and toolbox calls.  ROMlib was created from
publicly available documentation, but documentation isn't always
correct.  If an application relies on undocumented or misdocumented
features of the MacOS, the application may fail under Executor.  One
way in which Macintosh applications may fail is by referencing memory
that is not available.  
.B Executor
does not currently trap stray memory
accesses; they cause
.B executor
to dump core.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIAppleDouble\fP(5),
\fIdirectory_map\fP (5),
\fIecf\fP(5),
\fIhfv\fP(5),
\fIprinters.ini\fP(5),

.SH FILES

/opt/executor/splash - the directory that contains the splash screen
that
.B executor
presents as it is coming up.  You can disable the splash screen by
removing the files in this directory.  We have not yet released a tool
to allow people to build their own splash screens.

/opt/executor/tips.txt - a text file containing a collection of useful
tidbits that you can read when using Cmd-Shift-1.

/var/opt/executor/share/home - true location of /home/executor (which
is
just a symlink).

/home/executor - convenient place to store Macintosh files.

/dev/fd0, /dev/cdrom - floppy drive and CD-ROM drive that are examined
for Macintosh media when
.B executor
is first started and when Cmd-Shift-2 is typed.

/dev/cua0 - serial line that may be accessed when Macintosh programs
try to use the serial ports.  Serial port access is very weak and will
continue to be weak, even in release 2.1.


.SH DISCLAIMER
Executor is a registered trademark of Abacus Research and Development,
Inc.  Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Computer, Inc.
(Those are two separate companies; please don't confuse the two.)
